The Project Gutenberg eBook of The place of the individual in society
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The place of the individual in society


Author: Emma Goldman

Release date: August 16, 2023 [eBook #71418]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: Free Society Forum, 1940

Credits: Fritz Ohrenschall, Louise Pattison and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN SOCIETY ***





                 _The_
        PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
               IN SOCIETY

    [Illustration: Author Photograph]

            By EMMA GOLDMAN




“NATIONALISM AND ITS RELATION TO CULTURE”

_By_ RUDOLF ROCKER


This profound work will revolutionize the intellectual world of thought
by showing that the heretofore accepted notions as to the underlying
causes of Social Phenomena are only partially true and therefore,
inadequate to explain how social changes are affected.

Many great thinkers have sought to formulate a “Philosophy of History”
which would enable us to analyze and explain, as well as predict social
and historical events. Buckle, Hegel, Marx and Spengler are just a few
among the great thinkers who have contributed to this great task, but
Rocker with his profound understanding and in his illuminating style
shows why the “Hegelian Dialectics”, “Marx’s Economic Determinism” and
“The Spenglerian Philosophy of Destiny” have failed.

In this veritable encyclopedia of knowledge, we see before us, in a
living procession, the great cultures of all ages. The thoughts and
ideals of the Ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks and Romans become
accessible to us with the same clarity and understanding as the thoughts
and ideals of our contemporaries. No intelligent person regardless of
his school of thought, can afford to miss reading this great work.

“Nationalism and Its Relation to Culture” will be published in two
volumes and sold at $7.50 for both volumes. We offer You this great work
at a price of $5.00, if you SUBSCRIBE IN ADVANCE.

This monumental work will soon be off the press. We urge you to send
your subscriptions now--in advance. By so doing, you will help our
committee complete the work and you will save $2.50.

SUBSCRIBE TODAY.

Subscriptions can be mailed to the following committees:

    ADELAIDE SCHULKIND
    104 Fifth Avenue
    New York, New York

    B. YELENSKY
    3332 Potomac Ave.
    Chicago, Illinois

    C. V. COOK
    1038 S. Alvarado St.
    Los Angeles, Calif.




THE INDIVIDUAL, SOCIETY AND THE STATE

By

EMMA GOLDMAN


The minds of men are in confusion, for the very foundations of our
civilization seem to be tottering. People are losing faith in the
existing institutions, and the more intelligent realize that capitalist
industrialism is defeating the very purpose it is supposed to serve.

The world is at a loss for a way out. Parliamentarism and democracy are
on the decline. Salvation is being sought in Fascism and other forms of
“strong” government.

The struggle of opposing ideas now going on in the world involves social
problems urgently demanding a solution. The welfare of the individual
and the fate of human society depend on the right answer to those
questions. The crisis, unemployment, war, disarmament, international
relations, etc., are among those problems.

The State, government with its functions and powers, is now the subject
of vital interest to every thinking man. Political developments in all
civilized countries have brought the questions home. Shall we have a
strong government? Are democracy and parliamentary government to be
preferred, or is Fascism of one kind or another,
dictatorship--monarchical, bourgeois or proletarian--the solution of the
ills and difficulties that beset society today?

In other words, shall we cure the evils of democracy by more democracy,
or shall we cut the Gordian knot of popular government with the sword of
dictatorship?

My answer is neither the one nor the other. I am against dictatorship
and Fascism as I am opposed to parliamentary regimes and so-called
political democracy.

Nazism has been justly called an attack on civilization. This
characterization applies with equal force to every form of dictatorship;
indeed, to every kind of suppression and coercive authority. For what is
civilization in the true sense? All progress has been essentially an
enlargement of the liberties of the individual with a corresponding
decrease of the authority wielded over him by external forces. This
holds good in the realm of physical as well as of political and economic
existence. In the physical world man has progressed to the extent in
which he has subdued the forces of nature and made them useful to
himself. Primitive man made a step on the road to progress when he first
produced fire and thus triumphed over darkness, when he chained the wind
or harnessed water.

What role did authority or government play in human endeavor for
betterment, in invention and discovery? None whatever, or at least none
that was helpful. It has always been the =individual= that has
accomplished every miracle in that sphere, usually in spite of the
prohibition, persecution and interference by authority, human and
divine.

Similarly, in the political sphere, the road of progress lay in getting
away more and more from the authority of the tribal chief or of the
clan, of prince and king, of government, of the State. Economically,
progress has meant greater well-being of ever larger numbers.
Culturally, it has signified the result of all the other
achievements--greater independence, political, mental and psychic.

Regarded from this angle, the problems of man’s relation to the State
assumes an entirely different significance. It is no more a question of
whether dictatorship is preferable to democracy, or Italian Fascism
superior to Hitlerism. A larger and far more vital question poses
itself: Is political government, is the State beneficial to mankind, and
how does it affect the individual in the social scheme of things?

The individual is the true reality in life. A cosmos in himself, he does
not exist for the State, nor for that abstraction called “society,” or
the “nation,” which is only a collection of individuals. Man, the
individual, has always been and, necessarily is the sole source and
motive power of evolution and progress. Civilization has been a
continuous struggle of the individual or of groups of individuals
against the State and even against “society,” that is, against the
majority subdued and hypnotized by the State and State worship. Man’s
greatest battles have been waged against man-made obstacles and
artificial handicaps imposed upon him to paralyze his growth and
development. Human thought has always been falsified by tradition and
custom, and perverted false education in the interests of those who held
power and enjoyed privileges. In other words, by the State and the
ruling classes. This constant incessant conflict has been the history of
mankind.

Individuality may be described as the consciousness of the individual as
to what he is and how he lives. It is inherent in every human being and
is a thing of growth. The State and social institutions come and go, but
individuality remains and persists. The very essence of individuality is
expression; the sense of dignity and independence is the soil wherein it
thrives. Individuality is not the impersonal and mechanistic thing that
the State treats as an “individual”. The individual is not merely the
result of heredity and environment, of cause and effect. He is that and
a great deal more, a great deal else. The living man cannot be defined;
he is the fountain-head of all life and all values; he is not a part of
this or of that; he is a whole, an individual whole, a growing,
changing, yet always constant whole.

Individuality is not to be confused with the various ideas and concepts
of Individualism; much less with that “rugged individualism” which is
only a masked attempt to repress and defeat the individual and his
individuality. So-called Individualism is the social and economic
=laissez faire=: the exploitation of the masses by the classes by means of
legal trickery, spiritual debasement and systematic indoctrination of
the servile spirit, which process is known as “education.” That corrupt
and perverse “individualism” is the strait-jacket of individuality. It
has converted life into a degrading race for externals, for possession,
for social prestige and supremacy. Its highest wisdom is “the devil take
the hindmost.”

This “rugged individualism” has inevitably resulted in the greatest
modern slavery, the crassest class distinctions, driving millions to the
breadline. “Rugged individualism” has meant all the “individualism” for
the masters, while the people are regimented into a slave caste to serve
a handful of self-seeking “supermen.” America is perhaps the best
representative of this kind of individualism, in whose name political
tyranny and social oppression are defended and held up as virtues; while
every aspiration and attempt of man to gain freedom and social
opportunity to live is denounced as “un-American” and evil in the name
of that same individualism.

There was a time when the State was unknown. In his natural condition
man existed without any State or organized government. People lived as
families in small communities; They tilled the soil and practiced the
arts and crafts. The individual, and later the family, was the unit of
social life where each was free and the equal of his neighbor. Human
society then was not a State but an =association=; a =voluntary=
association for mutual protection and benefit. The elders and more
experienced members were the guides and advisers of the people. They
helped to manage the affairs of life, not to rule and dominate the
individual.

Political government and the State were a much later development,
growing out of the desire of the stronger to take advantage of the
weaker, of the few against the many. The State, ecclesiastical and
secular, served to give an appearance of legality and right to the wrong
done by the few to the many. That =appearance= of right was necessary the
=easier= to rule the people, because no government can exist without the
=consent= of the people, consent open, tacit or assumed. Constitutionalism
and democracy are the modern forms of that alleged consent; the consent
being inoculated and indoctrinated by what is called “education,” at
home, in the church, and in every other phase of life.

That consent is the belief in authority, in the necessity for it. At its
base is the doctrine that man is evil, vicious, and too incompetent to
know what is good for him. On this all government and oppression is
built. God and the State exist and are supported by this dogma.

Yet the State is nothing but a =name=. It is an abstraction. Like other
similar conceptions--nation, race, humanity--it has no organic reality.
To call the State an organism shows a diseased tendency to make a fetish
of words.

The State is a term for the legislative and administrative machinery
whereby certain business of the people is transacted, and badly so.
There is nothing sacred, holy or mysterious about it. The State has no
more conscience or moral mission than a commercial company for working a
coal mine or running a railroad.

The State has no more existence than gods and devils have. They are
equally the reflex and creation of man, for man, the =individual=, is the
only reality. The State is but the shadow of man, the shadow of his
opaqueness of his ignorance and fear.

Life begins and ends with man, the individual. Without him there is no
race, no humanity, no State. No, not even “society” is possible without
man. It is the individual who lives, breathes and suffers. His
development, his advance, has been a continuous struggle against the
fetishes of his own creation and particularly so against the “State.”

In former days religious authority fashioned political life in the image
of the Church. The authority of the State, the “rights” of rulers came
from on high; power, like faith, was divine. Philosophers have written
thick volumes to prove the sanctity of the State; some have even clad it
with infallibility and with god-like attributes. Some have talked
themselves into the insane notion that the State is “superhuman,” the
supreme reality, “the absolute.”

Enquiry was condemned as blasphemy. Servitude was the highest virtue. By
such precepts and training certain things came to be regarded as
self-evident, as sacred of their truth, but because of constant and
persistent repetition.

All progress has been essentially an unmasking of “divinity” and
“mystery,” of alleged sacred, eternal “truth”; it has been a gradual
elimination of the abstract and the substitution in its place of the
real, the concrete. In short, of facts against fancy, of knowledge
against ignorance, of light against darkness.

That slow and arduous liberation of the individual was not accomplished
by the aid of the State. On the contrary, it was by continuous conflict,
by a life-and-death struggle with the State, that even the smallest
vestige of independence and freedom has been won. It has cost mankind
much time and blood to secure what little it has gained so far from
kings, tsars and governments.

The great heroic figure of that long Golgotha has been Man. It has
=always= been the individual, often alone and singly, at other times in
unity and co-operation with others of his kind, who has fought and bled
in the age-long battle against suppression and oppression, against the
powers that enslave and degrade him.

More than that and more significant: It was man, the individual, whose
soul first rebelled against injustice and degradation; it was the
individual who first conceived the idea of resistance to the conditions
under which he chafed. In short, it is always the individual who is the
parent of the liberating =thought= as well as of the =deed=.

This refers not only to political struggles, but to the entire gamut of
human life and effort, in all ages and climes. It has always been the
individual, the man of strong mind and will to liberty, who paved the
way for every human advance, for every step toward a freer and better
world; in science, philosophy and art, as well as in industry, whose
genius rose to the heights, conceiving the “impossible,” visualizing its
realization and imbuing others with his enthusiasm to work and strive
for it. Socially speaking, it was always the prophet, the seer, the
idealist, who dreamed of a world more to his heart’s desire and who
served as the beacon light on the road to greater achievement.

The State, every government whatever its form, character or color--be it
absolute or constitutional, monarchy or republic, Fascist, Nazi or
Bolshevik--is by its very nature conservative, static, intolerant of
change and opposed to it. Whatever changes it undergoes are always the
result of pressure exerted upon it, pressure strong enough to =compel= the
ruling powers to submit peaceably or otherwise, generally
“otherwise”--that is, by revolution. Moreover, the inherent conservatism
of government, of authority of any kind, unavoidably becomes
reactionary. For two reasons: first, because it is in the nature of
government not only to retain the power it has, but also to strengthen,
widen and perpetuate it, nationally as well as internationally. The
stronger authority grows, the greater the State and its power, the less
it can tolerate a similar authority or political power along-side of
itself. The psychology of government demands that its influence and
prestige constantly grow, at home and abroad, and it exploits every
opportunity to increase it. This tendency is motivated by the financial
and commercial interests back of the government, represented and served
by it. The fundamental =raison d’etre= of every government to which,
incidentally, historians of former days wilfully shut their eyes, has
become too obvious now even for professors to ignore.

The other factor which impels governments to become even more
conservative and reactionary is their inherent distrust of the
individual and fear of individuality. Our political and social scheme
cannot afford to tolerate the individual and his constant quest for
innovation. In “self-defense” the State therefore suppresses,
persecutes, punishes and even deprives the individual of life. It is
aided in this by every institution that stands for the preservation of
the existing order. It resorts to every form of violence and force, and
its efforts are supported by the “moral indignation” of the majority
against the heretic, the social dissenter and the political rebel--the
majority for centuries drilled in State worship, trained in discipline
and obedience and subdued by the awe of authority in the home, the
school, the church and the press.

The strongest bulwark of authority is uniformity; the least divergence
from it is the greatest crime. The wholesale mechanisation of modern
life has increased uniformity a thousandfold. It is everywhere present,
in habits, tastes, dress, thoughts and ideas. Its most concentrated
dullness is “public opinion.” Few have the courage to stand out against
it. He who refuses to submit is at once labelled “queer,” “different”
and decried as a disturbing element in the comfortable stagnancy of
modern life.

Perhaps even more than constituted authority, it is social uniformity
and sameness that harass the individual mast. His very “uniqueness,”
“separateness” and “differentiation” make him an alien, not only in his
native place, but even in his own home. Often more so than the foreign
born who generally falls in with the established.

In the true sense one’s native land, with its background of tradition,
early impressions, reminiscences and other things dear to one, is not
enough to make sensitive human beings feel =at home=. A certain atmosphere
of “belonging,” the consciousness of being “at one” with the people and
environment, is more essential to one’s feeling of home. This holds good
in relation to one’s family, the smaller local circle, as well as the
larger phase of the life and activities commonly called one’s country.
The individual whose vision encompasses the whole world often feels
nowhere so hedged in and out of touch with his surroundings than in his
native land.

In pre-war time the individual could at least escape national and family
boredom. The whole world was open to his longings and his quests. Now
the world has become a prison, and life continual solitary confinement.
Especially is this true since the advent of dictatorship, right and
left.

Friedrich Nietzsche called the State a cold monster. What would he have
called the hideous beast in the garb of modern dictatorship? Not that
government had ever allowed much scope to the individual; but the
champions of the new State ideology do not grant even that much. “The
individual is nothing,” they declare, “it is the collectivity which
counts.” Nothing less than the complete surrender of the individual will
satisfy the insatiable appetite of the new deity.

Strangely enough, the loudest advocates of this new gospel are to be
found among the British and American intelligentsia. Just now they are
enamored with the “dictatorship of the proletariat.” In theory only, to
be sure. In practice, they still prefer the few liberties in their own
respective countries. They go to Russia for a short visit or as salesmen
of the “revolution,” but they feel safer and more comfortable at home.

Perhaps it is not only lack of courage which keeps these good Britishers
and Americans in their native lands rather than in the millenium come.
Subconsciously there may lurk the feeling that individuality remains the
most fundamental fact of all human association, suppressed and
persecuted yet never defeated, and in the long run the victor.

The “genius of man,” which is but another name for personality and
individuality, bores its way through all the caverns of dogma, through
the thick walls of tradition and custom, defying all taboos, setting
authority at naught, facing contumely and the scaffold--ultimately to be
blessed as prophet and martyr by succeeding generations. But for the
“genius of man,” that inherent, persistent quality of individuality, we
would be still roaming the primeval forests.

Peter Kropotkin has shown what wonderful results this unique force of
man’s individuality has achieved when strengthened by =co-operation= with
other individualities. The one-sided and entirely inadequate Darwinian
theory of the struggle for existence received its biological and
sociological completion from the great Anarchist scientist and thinker.
In his profound work, _Mutual Aid_, Kropotkin shows that in the animal
kingdom, as well as in human society, co-operation--as opposed to
internecine strife and struggle--has worked for the survival and
evolution of the species. He demonstrated that only mutual aid and
voluntary co-operation--=not= the omnipotent, all-devastating State--can
create the basis for a free individual and associational life.

At present the individual is the pawn of the zealots of dictatorship and
the equally obsessed zealots of “rugged individualism.” The excuse of
the former is its claim of a new objective. The latter does not even
make a pretense of anything new. As a matter of fact “rugged
individualism” has learned nothing and forgotten nothing. Under its
guidance the brute struggle for physical existence is still kept up.
Strange as it may seem, and utterly absurd as it is, the struggle for
physical survival goes merrily on though the necessity for it has
entirely disappeared. Indeed, the struggle is being continued apparently
=because= there is no necessity for it. Does not so-called overproduction
prove it? Is not the world-wide economic crisis an eloquent
demonstration that the struggle for existence is being maintained by the
blindness of “rugged individualism” at the risk of its own destruction?

One of the insane characteristics of this struggle is the complete
negation of the relation of the producer to the things he produces. The
average worker has no inner point of contact with the industry he is
employed in, and he is a stranger to the process of production of which
he is a mechanical part. Like any other cog of the machine, he is
replaceable at any time by other similar depersonalized human beings.

The intellectual proletarian, though he foolishly thinks himself a free
agent, is not much better off. He, too, has a little choice or
self-direction, in his particular metier as his brother who works with
his hands. Material considerations and desire for greater social
prestige are usually the deciding factors in the vocation of the
intellectual. Added to it is the tendency to follow in the footsteps of
family tradition, and become doctors, lawyers, teachers, engineers, etc.
The groove requires less effort and personality. In consequence nearly
everybody is out of place in our present scheme of things. The masses
plod on, partly because their senses have been dulled by the deadly
routine of work and because they must eke out an existence. This applies
with even greater force to the political fabric of today. There is no
place in its texture for free choice of independent thought and
activity. There is a place only for voting and tax-paying puppets.

The interests of the State and those of the individual differ
fundamentally and are antagonistic. The State and the political and
economic institutions it supports can exist only by fashioning the
individual to their particular purpose; training him to respect “law and
order;” teaching him obedience, submission and unquestioning faith in
the wisdom and justice of government; above all, loyal service and
complete self-sacrifice when the State commands it, as in war. The State
puts itself and its interests even above the claims of religion and of
God. It punishes religious or conscientious scruples against
individuality because there is no individuality without liberty, and
liberty is the greatest menace to authority.

The struggle of the individual against these tremendous odds is the more
difficult--too often dangerous to life and limb--because it is not truth
or falsehood which serves as the criterion of the opposition he meets.
It is not the validity or usefulness of his thought or activity which
rouses against him the forces of the State and of “public opinion.” The
persecution of the innovator and protestant has always been inspired by
fear on the part of constituted authority of having its infallibility
questioned and its power undermined.

Man’s true liberation, individual and collective, lies in his
emancipation from authority and from the belief in it. All human
evolution has been a struggle in that direction and for that object. It
is not invention and mechanics which constitute development. The
ability to travel at the rate of 100 miles an hour is no evidence of
being civilized. True civilization is to be measured by the individual,
the unit of all social life; by his individuality and the extent to
which it is free to have its being, to grow and expand unhindered by
invasive and coercive, authority.

Socially speaking, the criterion of civilization and culture is the
degree of liberty and economic opportunity which the individual enjoys;
of social and international unity and co-operation unrestricted by
man-made laws and other artificial obstacles; by the absence of
privileged castes and by the reality of liberty and human dignity; in
short, by the true emancipation of the individual.

Political absolutism has been abolished because men have realized in the
course of time that absolute power is evil and destructive. But the same
thing is true of all power, whether it be the power of privilege, of
money, of the priest, of the politician or of so-called democracy. In
its effect on individuality it matters little what the particular
character of coercion is--whether it be as black as Fascism, as yellow
as Nazism or as pretentiously red as Bolshevism. It is power that
corrupts and degrades both master and slave and it makes no difference
whether the power is wielded by an autocrat, by parliament or Soviets.
More pernicious than the power of a dictator is that of a class; the
most terrible--the tyranny of a majority.

The long process of history has taught man that division and strife mean
death, and that unity and co-operation advance his cause, multiply his
strength and further his welfare. The spirit of government has always
worked against the social application of this vital lesson, except where
it served the State and aided its own particular interests. It is this
anti-progressive and anti-social spirit of the State and of the
privileged castes back of it which has been responsible for the bitter
struggle between man and man. The individual and ever larger groups of
individuals are beginning to see beneath the surface of the established
order of things. No longer are they so blinded as in the past by the
glare and tinsel of the State idea, and of the “blessings” of “rugged
individualism.” Man is reaching out for the wider scope of human
relations which liberty alone can give. For true liberty is not a mere
scrap of paper called “constitution,” “legal right” or “law.” It is not
an abstraction derived from the non-reality known as “the State.” It is
not the =negative= thing of being free =from= something, because with
=such= freedom you may starve to death. Real freedom, true liberty =is
positive=: it is freedom to something; it is the liberty to be, to do;
in short, the liberty of actual and active opportunity.

That sort of liberty is not a gift: it is the natural right of man, of
every human being. It cannot be given; it cannot be conferred by any law
or government. The need of it, the longing for it, is inherent in the
individual. Disobedience to every form of coercion is the instinctive
expression of it. Rebellion and revolution are the more or less
conscious attempt to achieve it. Those manifestations, individual and
social, are fundamentally expressions of the values of man. That those
values may be nurtured, the community must realize that its greatest and
most lasting asset is the unit--the individual.

In religion, as in politics, people speak of abstractions and believe
they are dealing with realities. But when it does come to the real and
the concrete, most people seem to lose vital touch with it. It may well
be because reality alone is too matter-of-fact, too cold to enthuse the
human soul. It can be aroused to enthusiasm only by things out of the
commonplace, out of the ordinary. In other words, the Ideal is the spark
that fires the imagination and hearts of men. Some ideal is needed to
rouse man out of the inertia and humdrum of his existence and turn the
abject slave into an heroic figure.

Right here, of course, comes the Marxist objector who has outmarxed Marx
himself. To such a one, man is a mere puppet in the hands of that
metaphysical Almighty called economic determinism or, more vulgarly, the
class struggle. Man’s will, individual and collective, his psychic life
and mental orientation count for almost nothing with our Marxist and do
not affect his conception of human history.

No intelligent student will deny the importance of the economic factor
in the social growth and development of mankind. But only narrow and
wilful dogmatism can persist in remaining blind to the important role
played by an idea as conceived by the imagination and aspirations of the
individual.

It were vain and unprofitable to attempt to balance one factor as
against another in human experience. No one single factor in the complex
of individual or social behavior can be designated as the factor of
decisive quality. We know too little, and may never know enough, of
human psychology to weigh and measure the relative values of this or
that factor in determining man’s conduct. To form such dogmas in their
social connotation is nothing short of bigotry; yet, perhaps, it has its
uses, for the very attempt to do so proved the persistence of the human
will and confutes the Marxists.

Fortunately even some Marxists are beginning to see that all is not well
with the Marxian creed. After all, Marx was but human--all too
human--hence by no means infallible. The practical application of
economic determinism in Russia is helping to clear the minds of the more
intelligent Marxists. This can be seen in the trans-valuation of Marxian
values going on in Socialist and even Communist ranks in some European
countries. They are slowly realising that their theory has overlooked
the human element, _den Menschen_, is a Socialist paper put it.
Important as the economic factor is, it is not enough. The rejuvenation
of mankind needs the inspiration and energising force of an ideal.

Such an ideal I see in Anarchism. To be sure, not in the popular
misrepresentations of Anarchism spread by the worshippers of the State
and authority. I mean the philosophy of a new social order based on the
released energies of the individual and the free association of
liberated individuals.

Of all social theories Anarchism alone steadfastly proclaims that
society exists for man, not man for society. The sole legitimate purpose
of society is to serve the needs and advance the aspiration of the
individual. Only by doing so can it justify its existence and be an aid
to progress and culture.

The political parties and men savagely scrambling for power will scorn
me as hopelessly out of tune with our time. I cheerfully admit the
charge. I find comfort in the assurance that their hysteria lacks
enduring quality. Their hosanna is but of the hour.

Man’s yearning for liberation from all authority and power will never be
soothed by their cracked song. Man’s quest for freedom from every
shackle is eternal. It must and will go on.


    This pamphlet is sponsored by the Free Society Forum
    1241 N. California Avenue
    Chicago, Illinois




     “The Vanguard”

     An anarchist--Communist Publication

     45 West 17th St.

     New York

     Subscription $1.00 per year.




     “Bolshevism Promises and Reality”

     by

     G. Maximov

     One of the most effective and best documented pamphlets on the
     Russian Revolution, by a man who lived through its various
     stages.

     Sponsored by the Free Society Forum.


     Single Copy 5c

     in Lots of 100

     3c a copy, plus postage

     B. Yelensky, Secretary

     3332 Potomac Avenue

     Chicago, Illinois




     LIVING MY LIFE

     by

     _Emma Goldman_

     Recognized as one of the greatest autobiographies ever written.

     Formerly $5.00

     Now available for $1.49

     through
     THE GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING COMPANY
     GARDEN CITY, NEW YORK

     “A human document of the most absorbing thought.”

     The N. Y. Times

     “A life unmatched by any woman of our time.”

     The N. Y. Herald-Tribune




     “jaybass” [Illustration: printers logo] printing




Transcriber’s Note


Obvious typographical errors corrected as follows:

  On Page 3: ‘Is political goverment, is the State...’--corrected to
      ‘government’.
  On Page 10: ‘But for the “genuis of man,” that...’--corrected to
      ‘genius’.
  On Back Cover: ‘...most absorbing though.’--corrected to
      ‘thought’.

Punctuation errors corrected without note.

Questionable spellings of ‘millenium’, ‘wilful’ and ‘wilfully’ retained.

_Text_ denotes italic and =text= denotes bold in this e-text version.

The title given on the cover of this Pamphlet and the title given on
the first page are indeed different.



        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN SOCIETY ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


